
Part 1

TEN ESSENTIAL ACTIONS:

Select an update policy and apply all available updates
-1.1. First the updates, then the rest...

		Click on Menu - Control Center - Administration - Update Manager

	Select an update policy (for beginners I recommend the first one, named "Just keep my computer safe"; I'll explain more about that later), let Update Manager check for available updates and apply them all.

	Note: during the updates you might be asked whether you want to replace a configuration file. Don't replace it: although replacing is generally safe, it's usually unnecessary.

	Afterwards reboot your computer (not always necessary after updates, but in this case, do it just to make sure).

	Better settings for installing software and for Update Manager
	
-1.2. Update Manager and the mechanism for installing software are two very important tools. That's why it's important that their settings are optimal. You can achieve that as follows:

	Improve the settings for installing software
	1.2.1. Mint deviates from the Ubuntu way, where the so-called "recommended" packages are concerned. When you install software yourself, Ubuntu installs the recommended packages by default, but Mint does not.

	This has two important disadvantages: in Mint, the features of the applications that you install yourself, can be needlessly crippled. And some how-to's for Ubuntu, don't work in Mint. All this for the sake of saving some disk space...

	You can make things right like this:

	Menu button - Control Center - Administration - Synaptic Package Manager

	Settings - Preferences - tab General
	Section Marking Changes: tick: Consider recommended packages as dependencies

	Click Apply

	Click OK.

	Furthermore, you need to change the setting "false" into "true", in the settings file /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/00recommends. That's easiest to do in the following way:

	Menu - Terminal

	Copy/paste the following command line into the terminal, for example by a right-click with your mouse (it's one line!):

		sudo sed -i 's/false/true/g' /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/00recommends

	Press Enter. When prompted, type your password. Your password will remain entirely invisible, not even dots will show, this is normal.
	Press Enter again.

	Consider changing the settings of Update Manager

-1.2.2. The default settings of Update Manager are very cautious; that's a characteristic of Linux Mint. Stability first and foremost.

	In itself that's good, although Ubuntu (on which Mint is built) is less cautious with updates. And Ubuntu is also stable and reliable.

	It might be worthwhile to make Mints Update Manager a little less cautious: that gives you the advantage of extra bug fixes.

	You can easily do that by switching your update policy. In the panel of Update Manager: Edit - Update policy. I definitely do not recommend the third option, called "Always update everything". But the second option called "Let me review sensitive updates" is a reasonable choice for people who already have some experience with Linux Mint.

	Note: if you're an absolute beginner with Linux, then it's better to select the first option called "Just keep my computer safe". With that update policy you only miss some ordinary bug fixes, but you still get all of the security updates.

	It's therefore not strictly necessary to change things. But it is important that you understand these aspects of Update Manager. That's why this is listed among the essential things to do.

	If you don't want to change the settings of Update Manager (yet), you can simply skip this.

	More about tweaking the settings of Update Manager here (*Click*).

-Drivers and full multimedia support
-1.3. For installing missing drivers and full multimedia support, proceed as follows (you need internet connection for this!):

	Install missing drivers
	1.3.1. Installing drivers is usually not necessary, because they are already present in the Linux kernel. Exceptions are some printer drivers and proprietary restricted drivers for (among others) Nvidia graphics cards.

	a. Install your printer and scanner in this way (*Click*).

	b. For optimal performance of your Nvidia video card, or your Broadcom wireless chipset, you'll want to install the closed source restricted driver (the proprietary driver). Like this:

	Menu - Control Center - Administration - Driver Manager

	When available for your system, this tool will present you with one or more installable non-free drivers. Select them, with the exception of the package intel-microcode or amd64-microcode (if any of these microcode packages is being offered to you).

	Reason: despite the "device not working" report, your device (CPU) is already working on the microcode contained in the BIOS / UEFI, which is usually just fine. Installing another microcode package has been known to cause severe boot problems on some hardware combinations!

	The required drivers are then automatically downloaded from the internet, from the software repositories of Mint, and (also automatically) installed. Afterwards you'll have to do a full reboot of your computer.

	Note: sometimes you're being offered several versions of the restricted driver for your Nvidia video card. The order of preference is as follows:

	1. nvidia-(from highest number to lowest number)
	2. nvidia-(from highest number to lowest number)-updates
	3. nvidia-experimental

	Only choose from the versions that you're being offered, because only those support your video card! Start with the preferred number one, and only work your way down when it doesn't perform well.

	Do you have a brand-new graphics card from Nvidia? Then it might be too new for the version of the proprietary restricted driver in the software repositories of Mint. In that case you won't be offered any proprietary driver by Driver Manager.

	If this happens, then you can look for another solution for your Nvidia card on this page.

	For an AMD/ATI video card you have to stick to the default open source driver. Because the closed AMD Catalyst (fglrx) drivers are not compatible with Linux Mint 18.x.

	These closed fglrx drivers are proprietary and so their code is not available. AMD indicated they no longer wanted to support them and urged their customers to use open-source drivers instead.

	If you're using an AMD or ATI GPU in Linux Mint 18.x, the operating system will automatically select either the radeon or the amdgpu driver for you, and both of these open-source drivers are installed by default.

-Install full multimedia support
-1.3.2. You've probably installed full multimedia support during the installation of Linux Mint, by ticking the checkbox for Install third-party software for graphics and Wi-Fi hardware, Flash, MP3 and other media. But if you didn't, you can do it now:

	Menu button - Sound & Video - Install Multimedia Codecs

	Note: this menu entry is only present when you haven't installed full multimedia support (mint-meta-codecs) yet. After installing it, this menu entry will disappear.

	You can play encrypted video DVD's with VLC Media Player, but you can also enable other media players in your system to play such DVD's. In the following way:

	a. Menu - Terminal

	b. Type (use copy/paste to transport this magical incantation to the terminal):

		sudo apt-get install libdvd-pkg

	Press Enter. When prompted, type your password. Your password will remain entirely invisible, not even dots will show, this is normal.

	Whenever the terminal asks you to confirm the installation procedure with a preselected "OK", press Enter to give that "OK".

	c. When it's finished, copy/paste this line into the terminal:

		sudo dpkg-reconfigure libdvd-pkg

	Press Enter and let it do its job, which might take some time, especially on old hardware. Just wait patiently for it to finish.

	d. Finally, lock the DVD decrypting packages you've installed to their current versions. Because updates for them are time consuming, might lead to disruptions and are rarely ever useful.

	For that, copy/paste the following line into the terminal:

		sudo apt-mark hold libdvd-pkg libdvdcss2 libdvdcss-dev

	Press Enter.

-Decrease the swap use (important)
-1.4. This is especially noticeable on computers with relatively low RAM memory (2 GB or less): they tend to be far too slow in Linux Mint, and Linux Mint accesses the hard disk too much. Luckily, this can be helped.

	Note: does your computer have 4 GB RAM or more? Then you can skip this item, because with so much RAM you probably won't notice any benefits from applying it.

	On the hard disk there's a separate partition for virtual memory, called the swap. When Mint uses the swap too much, the computer slows down a lot.

	Mint's inclination to use the swap, is determined by a setting. The lower the setting number, the longer it takes before Mint starts using the swap. On a scale of 0-100, the default setting is 60. Which is much too high for normal desktop use, and only fit for servers.

	A detailed explanation can be found here (link dead? Then download this pdf file with the same content).

	Now the how-to:

	a. Check your current swappiness setting:

	Menu - Terminal
	Type (use copy/paste to avoid errors):
		cat /proc/sys/vm/swappiness

	Press Enter.

	The result will probably be 60.

	b. To change the swappiness into a more sensible setting, type in the terminal (use copy/paste):
		gksudo xed /etc/sysctl.conf

	Press Enter.

	Scroll to the bottom of the text file and add your swappiness parameter to override the default. Copy/paste the following two green lines:

		# Decrease swap usage to a more reasonable level
		vm.swappiness=10

	c. Save and close the text file. Then reboot your computer.

	d. After the reboot, check the new swappiness value:
	Menu - Terminal
	Type (use copy/paste):
		cat /proc/sys/vm/swappiness

	Press Enter.

	Now it should be 10.

-More than 1 GB memory (RAM): tame the inode cache
-1.2. Computers with more than 1 GB of memory (RAM), will probably benefit by shrinking the inode cache less aggressively. 

	The price that you pay for this, is that certain system items will remain longer in the RAM memory, which decreases the amount of available RAM for general tasks. That's why this tweak is only useful for computers with more than 1 GB of memory (RAM).

	This is how you do it:

	a. Type in the terminal (use copy/paste):

		gksudo xed /etc/sysctl.conf

	Press Enter.

	Now a text file opens. Scroll to the bottom of that text file and add your swappiness and cache parameters to override the defaults, so copy/paste the following two green lines:
		# Improve cache management
		vm.vfs_cache_pressure=50
	d. Close the text file and reboot your computer.


-Install some useful system management tools
-1.7. For file management with root authority, it's best to use a stand-alone simple file manager that's not embedded in your operating system. Because otherwise you run the risk of messing up some vital file permissions in your home directory, if you inadvertently run your default file manager with "sudo" instead of "gksudo". Such a simple stand-alone file manager is Double Commander. 

	Some of my how-to's contain the use of the simple stand-alone text editor Leafpad, for editing system-wide configuration files with root authority. So it's handy to install that as well.

	Furthermore, a very useful tool for sound management is pavucontrol.

	Finally, Catfish is an excellent, simple and fast file finder.

	Install them all like this:

	Menu - Terminal

	Use copy/paste to transport this magical incantation to the terminal (it's one line!):

		sudo apt-get install doublecmd-gtk pavucontrol p7zip-rar catfish

	Press Enter. When prompted, type your password. Your password will remain entirely invisible when you type it, not even dots will show, this is normal.
	Press Enter again.

-Lots of RAM (at least 4 GB): put /tmp on tmpfs
-10. Does your system have lots of RAM memory? If it has at least 4 GB, then you can probably speed up your system a bit by placing /tmp on a tmpfs partition. Which means, translated into ordinary language: you bring about that temporary files will not be placed on the hard disk anymore, but on a virtual RAM disk instead.

	This is how you do it:

	a. Launch a terminal window.
	(You can launch a terminal window like this: *Click*)

	Copy/paste this green line into the terminal (it's one line!):

		sudo cp -v /usr/share/systemd/tmp.mount /etc/systemd/system/

	Press Enter. Type your password when prompted; your password will remain entirely invisible, not even dots will show when you type it, this is normal.

	b. Then copy/paste this command into the terminal:

		sudo systemctl enable tmp.mount

	Press Enter.

	c. Reboot your computer.

	d. After the reboot: check whether it works, with this terminal command:

		systemctl status tmp.mount

	By default, a tmpfs partition has its maximum size set to half your total RAM. The actual memory consumption depends on how much you fill it up, as a tmpfs partition doesn't consume any memory until it is actually needed.

	Note: do not apply this on systems with less RAM than 4 GB! Because then this tweak won't make them faster, but (much) slower.

-How to undo tmpfs
-10.1. Do you wish to undo tmpfs? Then copy/paste this line into the terminal:

		sudo rm -v /etc/systemd/system/tmp.mount

	Press Enter. Type your password when prompted; your password will remain entirely invisible, not even dots will show when you type it, this is normal.

	Afterwards, reboot your computer.

	Improve video performance for Intel graphics
	6. Does your computer have an Intel video card? If it's not too ancient (2008 or newer), then you can probably improve its performance noticeably. Namely by replacing its obsolete and outdated driver (xserver-xorg-video-intel) by a newer one.

	That old driver is only present to keep Linux Mint compatible with ancient Intel GPU's of the i8xx and i9xx family of chipsets, but it decreases the performance and stability of newer Intel video chipsets. Also it might be the cause of screen tearing.

	Removing it will force your system to use the far better new modesetting driver instead. This modesetting driver is already present in your kernel; removing the obsolete driver will wake it from its sleeping state.

	This is how to do it:

	a. Launch a terminal window.
	(You can launch a terminal window like this: *Click*)

	b. Copy/paste the following line into your terminal, in order to check your current graphics card and driver:

		inxi -G

	(if you type it: note the space after inxi and note that G is a capital letter)

	Press Enter.

	The output should show an Intel video card, not being of the ancient i8xx or i9xx family of chipsets (i915, i965, etc.). The reported driver should be: intel.

	c. Only proceed when the inxi check has confirmed that your Intel graphics chipset is modern enough! If so, copy/paste this line into the terminal:

		sudo apt-get remove xserver-xorg-video-intel

	Press Enter and submit your password. Please note that the password will remain entirely invisible, not even asterisks will show, which is normal.

	d. Reboot your computer.

	e. Check again with this terminal command (use copy/paste to transfer it to the terminal):

		inxi -G

	The reported driver should now be: modesetting. Any previous screen tearing should be gone.

	Note: Isn't that driver being reported by inxi, or does it report that modesetting has failed? Then execute this command in a terminal window (use copy/paste to transfer it):

		grep modesetting /var/log/Xorg.0.log

	Does the last line (or the last line but one) of the output it produces, look approximately similar to the blue line below? Then you're probably OK after all:

		[      7.302] (II) modesetting: Driver for Modesetting Kernel Drivers: kms

	If there's no such line, it might be safer to re-install the old driver. For that, see item 6.1 below.

	Do you experience any new problems because of this driver switch? Then undo the switch, as described in item 6.1 below.

-How to undo the Intel video driver switch
-6.1. If the driver switch from intel to modesetting causes any problems, then you can always easily undo that switch.

	This is how to undo it:

	a. Launch a terminal window.
	(You can launch a terminal window like this: *Click*)

	b. Copy/paste the following line into your terminal, in order to check your current graphics card and driver:

		sudo apt-get install xserver-xorg-video-intel

	Press Enter. Your password will remain entirely invisible when you type it, not even dots will show, this is normal. Press Enter again.

	c. Reboot. All should be like it was before.